---
layout: post
title:  "3D Packing for Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation"
date:   2021-09-07 15:14:18 +0900
categories: [related paper]
---

## Abstract
> Although cameras are ubiquitous, robotic platforms typically rely on active sensors like LiDAR for direct 3D perception. In this work, we propose a novel self-supervised monocular depth estimation method combining geometry with a new deep network, PackNet, learned only from unlabeled monocular videos. Our architecture leverages novel symmetrical packing and unpacking blocks to jointly learn to compress and decompress detail-preserving representation using 3D convolutions. Although self-supervised, our method outperforms other self, semi, and fully supervised method on the KITTI benchmark. The 3D inductive bias in PackNet enables it to scale with input resolution and number of parameters without overfitting, generalizing better on out-of-domain data such as the NuScenes dataset. Furthermore, it does not require large-scale supervised pretraining on ImageNet and can run in real-time. Finally, we release DDAD (Dense Depth for Automated Driving), a new urban driving dataset with more challenging and accurate depth evaluation, thanks to longer-range and denser ground-truth depth generated from high-density LiDARs mounted on a fleet of self-driving cars operating world-wide.

## Introduction
Accurate depth estimation is a key prerequisite in many robotics tasks, including perception, navigation, and planning. Depth from monocular camera configurations can provide useful cues for a wide variety of tasks, producing dense depth maps that could complement or eventually replace expensive range sensors. However, learning monocular dense depth via direct supervision requires ground-truth information from additional sensors and precise cross-calibration. Self-supervised methods do not suffer from these limitations, as they use geometrical constraints on image sequences as the sole source of supervision. In this work, we address the problem of jointly estimating scene structure and camera motion across RGB image sequences using a self-supervised deep network. 

While recent works in self-supervised monocular depth estimation have mostly focused on engineering the loss function, we show that performance critically depends on the model architecture, in line with the observations for other self-supervised tasks. Going beyond image classification models like ResNet, our main contribution is a new convolutional network architecture, called PackNet, for high-resolution self-supervised monocular depth estimation. We propose new packing and unpacking blocks that jointly leverage 3D convolutions to learn representations that maximally propagate dense appearance and geometric information while still being able to run in real time. Our second contribution is a novel loss that cna optimally leverage the camera's velocity when available (e.g., from cars, robots, mobile phones) to solve the inherent scale ambiguity in monocular vision. Our third contribution is a new dataset: *Dense Depth for Automated Driving (DDAD)*. It leverages diverse logs from a fleet of well-calibrated self-driving cars equipped with cameras and high-accuracy long-range LiDARs. Compared to existing benchmarks, DDAD enables much more accurate depth evaluation at range, which is key for high resolution monocular depth estimation methods.

Our experiments on the standard KITTI benchmark, the recent NuScenes datast, and our new proposed DDAD benchmark show that our self-supervised monocular approach 
1) improves on the state of the art, especially at longer ranges;
2) is competitive with fully supervise d methods;
3) generalizes better on unseen data;
4) scales better with number of parameters, input resolution, and more unlabeled training data;
5) can run in real time at high resolution;
6) does not require supervised pretraining on ImageNet to achieve state-of-the-art results; 
7) test-time ground-truth scaling if velocity information is available at training time. 

## Related Work
Depth estimation from a single image poses several challenges due to its ill-posed and ambiguous nature. However, modern convolutional networks have shown that it is possible to successfully leverage appearance-based patterns in large scale datasets in order to make accurate predictions. 

### Depth Network Architectures
